So now we have a good understanding of how WordPress works. In this section we will deviate a little bit from
WordPress stuff and will take a look at something interesting. What we're gonna do in this section
is not required to actually create WordPress themes.
However I think it's gonna be a very useful section. I think maybe it's the most important section
in this course. Remember that we haven't yet loaded any CSS or JavaScript in our theme,
right?
I've actually intended to postpone this step a little bit because when you're working on a big theme
or a theme that you're gonna sell to people, you will probably need to have your code organized and
maintainable and easy to modify.
In this section we will learn how to manage packages with NPM and automate tasks like compiling
SASS to CSS, minifying CSS and JavaScript etc. And we will do that with a package called Gulp.
In this lecture we'll have a very quick look on what is NPM and Gulp
in case you don't know. But if you do, you can skip this one.
So NPM is a package manager for JavaScript and it's used to manage JavaScript dependencies. NPM has a
large online database that contains all the packages and is called the NPM Registry. And it also has
a command line client in order to access the NPM Registry.
So how exactly does NPM work?
Imagine we have the NPM Registry, which contains pretty much all the packages you will need. And of course
it's an online database. Now locally on your machine
you need to access this database.
So imagine this is the folder of our theme.
So we have the lib folder and we also have the index.php and the other files.
I just want to emphasize on node_modules folder and the package.json file.
These two will be created once we install NPM in our folder.
Now imagine this is our terminal or command line on Windows. If we have NPM installed on our machine,
now inside the folder we can run "npm install" and then the package name. So for example "jquery".
This will pull the juery package from the online database into the node_modules folder.
So whenever you want to install or update a JavaScript plugin we won't have to create you know  JS
folder and then download the code and then put it in the folder manually.
And if we want to update it we will delete and replace.
We can just manage everything with NPM using command line interface without doing anything manually.
Another important feature of NPM is that if you are using a GIT repository for example you don't have
to put the node_modules folder in the repository. The node_modules folder would probably be a very large
folder with a lot of files and folders. And it will be a pain to move it around and track it on GIT
and that sort of stuff.
And the reason we don't need to include it in a GIT repository is package.json.
package.json will keep track of plugins that we will install in a JSON file and it also includes the version
that you want for each plugin.
So once you have this file in your folder and you run "npm install" NPM will create the node_modules folder and install
the plugins included in package.json. And that's why it's pointless to have node_modules in the repository.
So always put node_modules folder in .gitignore file, right? As you can see in the NPM Registry
we have a package called Gulp.
So this is actually the first package that we are gonna use from NPM and it will help us in task
automation. So Gulp is a tool for automating tasks in your development
workflow. These tasks include you know compiling SASS to CSS and minifying CSS, transpiling
new JavaScript versions to older ones in order to support older browsers, bundling multiple JavaScript
files and package them into one file, compressing images and zipping files.
I think it's better to start installing NPM and Gulp and see them in real life. So let's do that in the
next lecture.